Story Recapped here.
Today, I'm going to explain a drama, mystery,
sci-fi film called "Donnie Darko."
Spoilers ahead!
Watch out and take care.
On October 2, 1988, a teenager named Donnie
wakes up in the middle of the road after sleepwalking
the night before.
He takes in the sights, confused at what happened
to him at first, before smiling.
Then, he rides his bicycle back to his home
in a small town in Virginia, where his family
spends the morning typically despite him disappearing
in the night.
That evening, Donne has dinner with his family:
his parents, Eddie and Rose, and his sisters,
Elizabeth and Samantha.
Elizabeth and Eddie discuss politics, which
leads to Rose suggesting that Elizabeth go
to Harvard next fall.
Donnie makes an inappropriate joke to his
little sister that leads to an argument between
him and Elizabeth.
Later that night, Rose confronts her son about
disappearing in the night.
Donnie becomes defensive and suggests that
she take his medications instead.
Rose leaves and discusses his behavior with
Eddie.
Unable to sleep, Eddie heads to the living
room to watch T.V. Upstairs, Donnie is woken
up by a mysterious voice that leads him to
sleepwalk out of his bedroom.
Donnie passes by his father, but he has fallen
asleep in the living room.
The voice beckons him as he walks outside
and into the dark streets.
Finally, Donnie reaches a golf course and
smiles at the figure before him.
There stands a strange person wearing a creepy
rabbit costume.
The rabbit tells him that the world will end
in 28 days, 6 hours, 42 minutes, and 12 seconds.
Back at home, Elizabeth had just returned
when something loud and heavy crashes into
the house, alerting everyone.
The next day, Donnie wakes up on the golf
course, finding a marker in his hand and the
numbers 28, 6, 42, and 12 written on his arm.
He walks home and sees officers and spectators
around his house as the jet engine that fell
on his bedroom is being removed.
The F.A.A. provides them accommodations and
payment for repairs in exchange for a non-disclosure
agreement.
Donnie learns that the F.A.A. hasn't figured
out where the jet engine came from.
In their hotel room, Samantha asks questions
about the jet engine, but her old siblings
dismiss her questions.
In the other room, their parents talk about
an old high school classmate who died on the
way to their prom after a paranoid episode.
Eddie worries if Donnie will end up the same
way.
On the next day, Donnie and Samantha meet
up with their schoolmates: Ronald, Sean, Joanie,
and Cherita.
The girls eagerly ask about the jet engine
incident while Donnie's friends offer him
a cigarette.
Ronald starts mocking Cherita, but Donnie
defends her.
At school, Donnie attends an English class
discussing The Destructors by Graham Greene.
His teacher, Karen Pomeroy, asks for his opinion
on the book's passage about destruction.
He suggests that since destruction is a form
of creation, the novel's characters may want
to see the world torn apart to change something.
The door opens, and all eyes meet the new
girl, Gretchen Ross.
Ms. Pomeroy challenges Gretchen to sit next
to the boy she finds most attractive, and
she chooses Donnie.
On their way to Donnie's psychiatrist, Eddie
laments reconstructing their house and how
the F.A.A. refuses to give them information
about what happened.
Distracted by the conversation, Eddie nearly
hits an old woman standing in the middle of
the road.
Donnie walks up to the woman to help, and
she whispers something in his ear.
At Dr. Thurman's office, Donnie recounts meeting
the figure in the rabbit costume, who he's
named Frank.
Donnie explains how Frank told him that the
world is ending, but he refuses to believe
that.
On the next day, Donnie's class watches a
video about overcoming fears hosted by Jim
Cunningham.
Again, Donnie hears Frank's voice, who advises
him to pay close attention to the video.
While asleep on the couch, Donnie dreams about
the school in the water.
He wakes up, seeing Frank watching him.
Under Frank's influence, Donnie leaves the
house while carrying an ax.
He reaches a building's water pipe and breaks
it.
On the next day, Donnie teases Samantha about
a short story she wrote while waiting for
the bus.
Sean points out that their bus is 20-minutes
late.
Two girls from their school run up to them,
reporting that the school is closed due to
flooding in the building.
At the school, Principal Cole stands in the
flooding building; the water is leaking from
a busted water main.
Outside, they find an ax protruding from the
school's statue's head.
A message is written at the foot of the statue,
saying, "They made me do it."
While walking back to school, Donnie spots
Gretchen getting cornered by the school bullies
Seth and Ricky.
The two walk together, where he learns that
Gretchen moved with her mom to escape her
stepdad after he stabbed her mother.
Donnie shares that he was arrested for burning
down an abandoned house, then clarifies that
he's gotten his life straight after the event.
Before going their separate ways, Donnie asks
Gretchen out, and she accepts.
During his next therapy session, Dr. Thurman
puts Donnie under hypnosis, and he starts
talking about Gretchen.
Dr. Thurman changes the subject to school
and his family, but Donnie continues talking
about girls and fantasizing about the actress
Christina Applegate.
Dr. Thurman ends the hypnosis when she sees
Donnie unzipping his pants.
Back at school, the police order the students
to write "They made me do it" on the board
to match their handwriting with the vandalism.
When it's Donnie's turn, Principal Cole marks
him as suspicious, given his hastiness.
While in the bathroom, Seth accuses Donnie
of spreading rumors that he flooded the school.
Then, Seth puts a knife to Donnie's throat,
accusing him of doing the deed instead before
leaving.
Later that day, Donnie and his friends hang
out in a field, shooting at bottles as they
argue about The Smurfs.
However, their conversation is interrupted
when the same old woman that Eddie nearly
hit before stops in the middle of the road
again, alarming a driver.
Donnie's friends nickname her Grandma Death,
as she is often seen standing in the middle
of the road to check her empty mailbox that
never receives any mail.
That evening, the school hosts an emergency
P.T.A. meeting to determine who flooded and
vandalized the school.
The gym teacher, Mrs. Kitty Farmer, links
the act of vandalism to the story, The Destructors,
which Ms. Pomeroy teaches in her English class.
Mrs. Farmer claims that the novel inspired
the act and shouldn't be taught in their school.
As this happens, Donnie finds Frank in his
bathroom, who assures him that no one will
find out what he did.
Donnie faces the strange creature, but a force
field seemingly blocks him from Frank.
He asks why Frank led him to flood the school
to which Frank merely explains that they are
in grave danger.
When asked where he came from, Frank questions
if Donnie believes in time travel.
The conversation ends when Samantha walks
into the bathroom; Frank has disappeared.
On poetry day, Donnie reads a poem he wrote
about Frank.
Later that day, Mrs. Farmer implements attitude
lessons, but Donnie argues the concept that
she's teaching, insisting that life and human
emotions cannot be lumped into categories.
Due to this argument, Donnie's parents are
called into the principal's office.
Despite Mrs. Farmer's hysterics, Rose and
Eddie are not bothered by Donnie's behavior,
though they suspend his after-school activities
as punishment.
Mrs. Farmer lectures Rose on raising her son,
shocking the mother.
On October 10, Donnie learns time travel theories
from his science teacher, Dr. Kenneth Monnitoff.
Dr. Monnitoff gives Donnie a book titled "The
Philosophy of Time Travel," written by a former
nun who suddenly turned to science.
Donnie recognizes the author's name Roberta
Sparrow as Grandma Death.
In his next therapy session, Donnie talks
about Roberta and how Frank told him to look
into time travel, leading him to assume that
Frank wants him to talk to Roberta.
Donne tells Dr. Thurman that Roberta said
that every living creature dies alone, which
reminded him of his childhood dog, who died.
Donnie admits that he has stopped wondering
about God but confesses that he doesn't want
to be alone.
While watching football that evening, Donne
sees a bubble emerging from his father and
sister, dictating their next steps.
He looks down and sees a bubble on his chest,
directing him to go somewhere.
Donnie follows the bubble to his parent's
room, where he finds a gun in the closet.
A week later, Donnie walks home with Gretchen,
where they talk about turning back the time.
Donnie leans to kiss her, but Gretchen avoids
him, saying that she wants their first kiss
to be something she'll remember fondly of
in the future.
After pondering Donnie's behavior, Rose and
Eddie visit Dr. Thurman to discuss him.
Dr. Thurman suggests that Donnie is afraid
of the world, and thus he's detached himself
from reality.
Dr. Thurman tells them about Frank, which
the parents aren't aware of.
The signs point to Donnie having daylight
hallucinations and paranoid schizophrenia.
During this, Donnie continuously jams a knife
onto his bathroom mirror, imagining Frank
in the reflection.
Days later, Jim Cunningham hosts a school
assembly that Mrs. Farmer arranged.
Jim presents a story as part of the lesson,
where the protagonist is named Frank, distracting
Donnie.
Once Jim receives questions from the students,
Donnie finds his answers absurd and starts
berating Jim.
He offers crude advice to the students who
raised their questions earlier.
The adults are horrified at Donnie's statements,
yet the students cheer him as he's being escorted
away.
After school, Donnie rants about Jim's hypocrisy
to Gretchen.
He hands her Roberta's book and explains that
he sees bizarre things tied to the book.
Hoping for answers, the two visit Roberta's
home, but no one responds.
Finally, while checking her mailbox, they
spot Roberta watching them on the terrace.
In his mind, Donnie hears Frank telling him
to send Roberta a letter.
The next day, Mrs. Farmer's insistence on
teaching the students morality hindered the
other teachers.
Dr. Monnitoff refuses to discuss philosophy
with Donnie when he brings God into the argument,
and Ms. Pomeroy confiscates copies of The
Destructors from the students.
While walking home from school, Donnie finds
Jim's wallet on the street, learning where
he lives.
During Gretchen and Donnie's science presentation,
Seth and Ricky bring up Gretchen's stepfather,
which upsets her.
She storms off the school with Donnie following
behind.
Full of emotions, Gretchen kisses him, solidifying
their relationship.
That night, Donnie and Gretchen watch a movie
together.
Gretchen falls asleep in the middle of the
film, allowing Donnie to speak to Frank.
Frank removes the head of his costume, revealing
the face of a young man with an injured eye.
He recounts that his father and his grandfather
are also named Frank.
The movie warps, showing Donnie a portal that
seems to lead to the sky.
Then, he envisions fire as Frank advises him
to "burn it to the ground."
Finally, Donnie leaves the cinema alone, formulating
a plan.
While Jim hosts the school's talent show,
including Samantha's dance group as one of
the contestants, Donnie finds his way to Jim's
house and pours gas all over.
Jim's house burns down as the crowd cheers
in the talent show.
Donnie heads back to the cinema, seeing that
Gretchen is still asleep, not noticing that
he left.
The following morning, Donnie shares his worries
about his sanity with his father.
Not wanting his son to be dragged down by
these thoughts, Eddie advises Donnie to speak
his mind no matter what others think.
Donnie is comforted, seeing his father's confidence
in him.
While extinguishing the fire in Jim's house,
the news reveals that the firefighters found
obscene content involving minors, leading
to Jim's arrest.
On October 24, Ms. Pomeroy gets fired without
being given a reason for her dismissal.
Samantha's dance group is invited to perform
in California, which excites their coach,
Mrs. Farmer.
However, her joy is soon cut short when she
learns about Jim's arrest.
In one of her last classes, Ms. Pomeroy uses
the rabbits from Watership Down as a metaphor
for human existence.
But Donnie interrupts her, noting how the
rabbits cannot compare to humans as they have
no complex emotions.
Gretchen chimes to explain how the rabbits
in the novel are products of the author's
imagination, thus carrying his emotion.
That afternoon, Mrs. Farmer asks Rose to chaperone
the dance group's trip to California while
she testifies to defend Jim, believing his
arrest is a conspiracy.
Later that day, Rose finds a disturbing sketch
Donnie made in his bedroom.
She explains how she'll be leaving with Samantha
to California, and with Eddie being in New
York will leave Donnie and Elizabeth alone
in the house.
Knowing that she's disturbed by his drawings,
Donnie asks her what it feels to have a son
like him, to which she comforts him by saying
she feels wonderful for having him.
Days later, Elizabeth and Donnie say goodbye
to Rose and Samantha as they head to California.
After school, Donnie finds Ms. Pomeroy packing
up her things.
Getting inspired by Ms. Pomeroy's story of
a linguist choosing the words "Cellar Door"
as the most beautiful in the English language,
Donnie tells Cherita that things will get
better for her.
Tearfully, Cherita runs away, leaving her
ear muffs in his hands.
Donnie looks down and sees Cherita dropped
a notebook with his name on the front.
Donnie revisits Dr. Thurman, where she asks
him about his parents while he's under hypnosis.
Donnie remembers not receiving the Christmas
present he wanted, which made him feel regret.
When Dr. Thurman asks what else he regrets,
Donnie smiles sheepishly and confesses to
his crimes.
He explains that he had to obey Frank as he
saved his life and that he'd be left alone
if he didn't.
Donnie begins to cry, his face reddening,
as he tells Dr. Thurman about Frank's end
of the world prediction.
Still under hypnosis, Donnie gets up and picks
up a stuffed dog, cradling it in his arms
for comfort.
Then, he opens his eyes and shrieks, seeing
Frank in front of them.
Donnie's face calms, telling Dr. Thurman that
the sky will open up.
Dr. Thurman reminds him that there will be
nothing left but himself and Frank if the
sky opens up.
The idea brings Donnie to tears until Dr.
Thurman breaks him out of his hypnosis.
Before he leaves her office, Dr. Thurman reveals
that his medicines are placebo and he should
stop taking them.
She identifies to him the difference between
atheists and agnostics, classifying him as
the latter.
On October 29, Elizabeth announces to Donnie
that she's been accepted into Harvard.
He suggests throwing a Halloween party to
celebrate.
That evening, Gretchen arrives at the party,
distraught about her missing mother.
Donnie takes her to his bedroom, where she
shares her suspicion that her stepfather is
responsible.
The two start making out and head back to
the party after a passionate evening.
During this, Elizabeth searches for someone
named Frank.
Donnie's elated mood is suddenly warped into
dread.
He sees the bubble from his chest that leads
him to the note on the fridge, saying that
Frank went out to buy beer.
The bubble continues to move, showing him
visions that disturb him.
Donnie takes Gretchen, Ronald, and Sean away
from the party.
They go to Roberta's house, where Donnie and
Gretchen enter through the cellar door.
They search for Roberta but get ambushed by
Seth and Ricky, who hold the two at knifepoint.
Ricky throws Gretchen to the ground before
scaring Ronald and Sean away.
He sees a car coming and warns Seth, who has
Donnie pinned to the ground.
Ricky escapes before the car gets close.
Roberta appears in the middle of the road,
causing the car to swerve and hit Gretchen
instead.
The scene finally forces Seth to let go of
Donnie and escape.
Two boys step out of the car, including Frank,
who is now only an average teenager.
Cold with grief, Donnie shoots Frank in the
eye with the gun he stole from his parent's
room.
After Frank's friend flees, Roberta approaches
Donnie, having received the letter he sent
her.
She tells him that a storm is coming, so he
must hurry.
That morning, Donnie carries Gretchen's body
back to his house.
He takes his parent's car and finds a dark
vortex slowly descending over his house.
Donnie recklessly drives to a ridge overlooking
the town with Gretchen's body in the passenger's
seat.
Laughing at his hopelessness, Donnie watches
the vortex growing bigger, destroying the
plane Rose and Samantha are in.
As Donnie gazes at Gretchen's face, the events
of the last 28 days replay in his mind as
he recounts the letter he wrote to Roberta.
He tells her that he's afraid that the time-travel
book is not fictional and hopes to have something
to look forward to despite the world ending.
Donnie is back in his old bedroom, laughing
as he realizes that he gets a do-over.
It's October 2 again, and Donnie has a chance
to rewrite the past and save Gretchen.
He waits in bed as the jet engine falls into
his room, crushing him under its weight.
The people who would have had life-altering
experiences with Donnie of the other timeline
wake up from their dreams, including the real
Frank.
In the morning, this timeline's Gretchen bikes
pass the Darko's house as Donnie's body is
wheeled away.
But this Gretchen didn't meet Donnie.
So even as she waves to Rose, neither remember
each other in this new timeline.